# Summary and Background

Arcana and Magic Items focuses mainly on the aftermath of a few small, local groups who independently made breakthroughs in applying anomalous influence from other worlds, with a side-story having taken place and played out on the sidelines, largely to a destructive conclusion by the time of the Cataclysm.

Those groups were among many who, at one time or another, gleaned insight into the Beyond. Every so often, esoteric practices and mysticism led to gaining knowledge, slipping through cracks in the fabric of reality. Nearly every time this has happened, there was no further breakthrough. These mystics would go on to have some local impact on the theology and philosophy of the region, only to fade as history marched on. Here however, the interactions of a few such groups provided the spark to develop more practical applications, discoveries further expanded and refined as time went on. Looming overhead, though these groups knew little of what was going on, cutting-edge science was making even greater leaps and bounds into the study of the Beyond. This weakened the fabric of reality further, setting humanity up for its downfall, but among these mystics the wounds in the Veil offered even greater power to exploit.

But the largest of these local groups had their own, conflicting agendas. Some of these groups had rivalries that went back decades, before any of these breakthroughs occurred. Their conflicts escalated, every so often nearing the point of explosively revealing their activities to the larger world, until soon they were all dead and dying orders. By the time of the Cataclysm, only a scattered few survivors could be found. And time will tell whether their discoveries will persist to aid mankind's survival, whether their knowledge will fade into the darkness, or whether power from Beyond will only bring humanity another step closer to extinction.

# Fundamental Principles

The magic these arcane orders developed relies on a few different sources of power. The most notable distinction is between power drawn from earthly sources, often life force, and power of otherworldly origin. In every case, these sources of power are external, disconnected from its user. Directly tapping a power source like mana or even life force was a very late development, and thus the bulk of arcanist knowledge revolves around producing and utilizing these powers externally.

Blood magic was the first such practice to yield fruit. The work of the Sanguine Order, building off of the writings of mystics whom they preyed upon, led to a method of drawing power from the life force of living beings. To combat them, the fledgling Cleansing Flame developed methods to purify and neutralize captured artifacts they deemed unsafe and unholy. What remained after the process proved useful for lower-power, high-efficient artifacts they developed to combat their hated foe. And the Keepers of The Oath, aided by influence from Beyond, provided the final piece by drawing power from beyond the Veil. In turn, the Cleansing Flame found it easy to adapt their methods to put these otherworldly energies through the same process they used against sanguine relics, to fuel their holy weapons.

Magic items, as the mod's title implies, are a key focus of the mods lore as well as gameplay. The utility of anybody being able to use these purpose-built artifacts, and the emphasis on developing foci to channel these power sources towards a specific function, grounded the otherworldly into forms and actions easily grasped by the human mind. They were simple, intuitive. At least to use, even if considerable esoteric knowledge went into the principles behind each item's development and manufacture. The ability to let any raw recruit use their central tools of the trade, permitting specialists to focus on the study, production, and maintenance of said items gave these arcane orders a powerful logistical advantage.

Powerful an advantage as this is, there is always a price, always an energy source. Even if an item or spell makes a mockery of the laws of physics, some cost is incurred. Passive magical items are few and far between, many are relics whose origins are questionable or potentially unearthly. Even then, passive benefits usually have some form of downside, some counterbalance that draws upon energy in some way. This informs not just the mod's lore, but also its gameplay balance.

# Magic Signs and Arcane Blessings

True spells started to develop at a point where the arcanist orders were teetering on the brink of destruction, and the world around them was already in severe decline. Every such spell is just as purpose-built as the magic items used by the people who developed those spells, and all of them are sparked by otherworldly influence. Growing awareness of the Beyond, and the exotic principles their denizens operate on, enabled those who study the Interlopers to develop rudimentary, primitive perhaps, forms of magic.

These Magic Signs, as they came to be known, have a much more physical cost to pay than the spiritual energy that fuels mana. It draws upon the connections that form the mind, that tethers body and soul. Rooted in blood magic and sacrificial rite, such raw magic exerts a heavy toll on the mental fortitude of its users.

However, there are other methods. The Keepers of The Oath had a set of artifacts, forged by pact and sacrifice to their otherworldly patron, if used in the right way one could learn the path of true magic, to channel spiritual energy without harm to mind or body. Such knowledge was beyond the research of the orders, literal Arcane Blessings from outside the normal development of magic. However, before the Cataclysm these boons were vanishingly rare gifts, and almost every one of these holy relics have been lost. But if one were to reclaim such a relic, in this world of monsters and tears in reality, to aid their patron god's mysterious goals might lead to such gifts being granted more freely.

Finally, there were some who studied methods of emulating the Interlopers more directly, researching ways to make more direct use of the strange powers that the Beyond promised. While more scientifically-minded figures developed means to bring physical change upon human test subjects, at least one such independent development came close to bearing fruit. However, the practical application of that attempt was never realized, as it was the ritual that attempted to draw a sufficiently novel, yet still biological, form of Interloper into this plane sparked the downfall of the Sanguine Order. Those who retrace their research may find the means to bring that particular attempt at developing natural magic to its intended conclusion, however.

# Factions

From mystics and eccentric students of old pseudoscience, the foundation for what would come was laid. Sooth-sayers, would-be alchemists, and others gathered to compile what they had learned from their own independent efforts to peer beyond the Veil of reality. They built a substantial body of knowledge, and at least a few hinted at prophecies of futures that lay ahead, but at first there was no practical application to their theories. As had happened many times in the past, they dispersed over disagreements, ill omens, rituals that foretold grim fates. Once more, it seemed like this knowledge of what awaited in other realities was poised to become nothing more than another wave of esoteric mysticism, to be absorbed into more mundane faiths and practices.

But when they dispersed, other factions were waiting. People who received these texts, and provided the spark that this foundation required. The Sanguine Order was the most notable of those groups. Before this awakening, they were a mundane, albeit murderous, cult. Their practices were more philosophical than religious, indeed many of them were areligious, local mystics and rural religious communities were among their favored targets to prey upon, and after the arcane development they began a shift towards a sort of gnostic misotheism. The central aspect of their practice was power, and the belief that all living things had power within them that could be exploited. Through ritual murders and blood magic, they had begun to develop some inkling that this might in fact lead to supernatural developments, but this philosophy had yet to solidify into anything of practical value.

When they snatched up stray members of those mystics and their texts however, things began to fall into place. The Foundation, theoretical texts on practical utility of powers beyond humanity's grasp. And the Spark, a glimpse into something beyond the context of normal reality, that provided what was missing from the former. The Sanguine Order was not alone in this, and they weren't unopposed. Though isolated and rural, secretive in their criminal activities, they had made enemies. Vigilantes, most from small religious communities who had all been wronged by these blood mages, had already been attempting to hunt them down, to strike beyond the reach of the law. These people, united by a common enemy, would develop their own practices to counter the renewed threat the Sanguine Order posed, and the ritual nature of their developments would lead to increasingly syncretic practices. A necessity among a group who counted devout Catholics, Neo-Pagans of various stripes, Muslims, and other faiths among their founders. Thus, the Cleansing Flame was born.

As their local, small-scale clashes escalated, and as scattered groups made their own independent developments, another major faction would develop in the ensuing chaos. By this point in time, the scientific community had already began to deepen the wounds in the Veil with their experiments. More knowledge could be gleaned to those who already had the means to gaze into the Beyond, and another isolated cult saw something within. Moreover, it saw them in turn. Forged by a pact with this Interloper, one who had neither need nor interest in breaching the Veil physically, they brought with them an understanding of how to use power from Beyond in the same way that the Sanguine Order used blood magic, a power source that was considerably higher-energy than siphoning off stray life force from injury and death.

This sudden development threw the balance of power between these isolated groups into chaos. It was now full-on war, with these three factions being dominant. The Keepers of The Oath, as they came to be known, was at times ally and enemy to either of the two parties. Always trying to keep their clashes far from urban centers, yet increasingly dependent on contacts more connected to the world at large, the arcane orders soon went into decline. The deteriorating state of the world around them, the Cataclysm looming closer with every day, exacerbated this.

# Interlopers

In the wake of the Cataclysm, the world is now infested with beings that simply do not belong in this reality. The blob, the triffids, the Mycus, and more. It matters not whether some are perhaps merely from beyond the stars rather than beyond the Veil, perhaps attracted by this planet having become a powder keg of dimensional instability, that will threaten all of reality when it finally goes up in flames. Nor does it matter if they are mundane beings of thoroughly not-mundane realities, nor even if they are truly supernatural beings evocative of cosmic horror from the nightmares of imaginative authors. That these beings survive, even thrive, in a world so burdened by hazards like Thermodynamics or Relativity, is a mystery of science. Whoever might have some inkling of the truth is likely dead by now, and the Interlopers themselves are unlikely to be very helpful about answering those questions.

However, one thing in humanity's favor is a mutual disadvantage, shared with all these invaders who have set up shop in this reality. They can be hunted, fought, killed. If not exterminated, then potentially driven back and kept in check, though humanity is in no position to attempt such a thing on a large enough scale, and it's likely no one of this generation will live to see whether humanity rebuilds and adapts. The greater threats are those who have no physical presence on this world. There are things out there, Interlopers who have no need to exist in this realm of matter and energy, for they can pursue their goals just fine where they are.

As with the powers warring physically on the post-Cataclysm world, their numbers and strength vary, and many of these unknowable threats are truly that. Only a handful of them have even had enough interaction with humanity to have any sort of identity, to be named. One is the patron entity aiding the Keepers of The Oath, titled by them as He From Beyond The Veil. This being's true intent is still just as unknown as any other entity, though several of His goals are compatible enough with humanity's survival to explain why the Keepers saw this figure as a deity, with humanity's long-term interests in mind. There are hints that keeping rival powers in check are perhaps among His goals, along with warnings about potential consequences of the growing dimensional instability.

His followers preach that the fate of reality itself, of the Veil, even the survival of other Interlopers, is at stake, that the worst-case scenario may mean entirely planes of reality being cast into the abyss. They preach of the Veil as more than just a metaphorical barrier between worlds, but as literal threads woven into a support structure, without which entire universes may collapse. Whether His long-term plans are merely antagonistic towards other powers that dwell Beyond, whether the conquest of this world may follow from the Keepers pursuing this goal, or whether the true objectives are entirely beyond the context of this world and its stability, the Keepers are right in that, for now at least, this Interloper's short-term goals (however many centuries may be "short term" to such a being) are useful for survival in the wake of the Cataclysm.

His followers preach that the fate of reality itself, of the Veil, even the survival of other Interlopers, is at stake, that the worst-case scenario may mean entirely planes of reality being cast into the abyss. They preach of the Veil as more than just a metaphorical barrier between worlds, but as literal threads woven into a support structure, without which entire universes may collapse. Whether His long-term plans are merely antagonistic towards other powers that dwell Beyond, whether the conquest of this world may follow from the Keepers pursuing this goal, or whether the true objectives are entirely beyond the context of this world and its stability, the Keepers are right in that, for now at least, this Interloper's short-term goals (however many centuries may be "short term" to such a being) are useful for survival in the wake of the Cataclysm.

The other powers involved in meddling from Beyond are significantly less-involved in humanity's affairs, with a being known as The Archon being a distant second place in terms of how many have come to be aware of this being. This one was responsible for the downfall of the Keepers of The Oath, called into being by a sabotaged ritual. Other than an affinity for possessing those who call upon it, some degree of otherworldly influence on people while running amok with a physical host, and apparent rivalry with He From Beyond The Veil, nothing else is known about this being's goals and true nature.

# Interaction With Other Mods

In general, Arcana is fully intended to be compatible with Magiclysm and any other prominent magic-focused mods to be developed, and even strives to make combining them a more interesting experience, as much as possible within the limits of mod interaction. This applies from a lore perspective as well as gameplay, as Arcana's side-story is largely self-contained, written to avoid disrupting vanilla lore too severely.

In the context of Magiclysm specifically, the arcanist orders form a New Tradition, developing independently of the Old Tradition. Where declining magical orders refined natural magic from Foundation and Spark of a distant past, built up centuries of cautious development, the New Tradition made sporadic leaps and bounds, assisted by the worsening condition of the Veil permitting new knowledge to be gleamed from Beyond. It's most likely that the arcanists at least new that other mages had come before, but almost no one among the major orders knew of any extent orders, assuming this knowledge to be lost.

In functional terms, the only difference in lore between Arcana alone and Arcana plus Magiclysm is that these glimpses into the Beyond had yielded results in the distant past, successfully developed into a useful practice without needing the wounds in the Veil. But as with Magiclysm's established lore, by the decades just before the Cataclysm this knowledge was increasingly rare. The only arcanists likely to have known much about the Old Tradition were the mystics whose writing provided the Foundation. Even then it was mixed in with eccentric religious texts, alchemical writings, exotic philosophy and other information that made its practical applications no longer easily understood, until the Sanguine Order provided the Spark that brought the New Tradition to life.